[DRAMATIC SOUND EFFECTS]
[MUSICAL FLOURISH]
[EERIE MUSIC PLAYING]
[VIOLIN SOLO]
[FAST STRING MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The human body operates
like a musical instrument,
with every organ, tissue,
and bone in a constant state
of vibration.
This knowledge was mostly lost
to antiquity, until recently.
>> When I was in school, I
was taught to think in terms
of cells as little bags of
salt water and fragile neurons
and tissue.
But the new science
is telling us
that the average human has about
50 trillion cells in the body.
And every one of those cells
has an electrical potential
of about 0.07 volts.
It is about 3.5 trillion
volts of electrical potential
that we have access to in
our bodies for healing.
>> Each part of your body has a
certain vibration that it needs
to have in order to be
in a harmonious state,
a coherent state,
a healthy state.
When it gets into a
disharmonious state,
that's when it gets
into a diseased state,
or illness starts to set in.
>> When healthy, all parts of
the body resonate in coherence
with harmonic vibrations which
we could call "sound health."
>> Frequency plus
intent equals healing,
which means the sound we make,
coupled with the intention
or the consciousness
we put on the sound,
creates the outcome
of the sound.
And this includes our voice.
>> So we want to use
sound in a very coherent,
very intentional
way to help us heal.
[MELODIOUS PERCUSSION MUSIC]
>> The human body is an
elaborate instrument with its
own natural maintenance system.
>> Every cell is a transistor.
Every cell is a resistor.
Every cell is a capacitor.
We are gated circuits.
We are photon emitters,
photon receivers.
We store and
retrieve information.
And we do all of these
things with the ability
to self-regulate.
We are the only
form of life that
can self-regulate
the soft technology
that we have in our bodies.
[PIANO MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The human motherboard
includes two vital centers,
the heart and the brain.
>> Our brain puts out an
electromagnetic field.
Our heart puts out an
When they are locked in
resonance or synchrony
together, that's called
heart-brain coherence.
>> It is interesting
that the word "heart"
contains both the
words "ear" and "hear."
It does seem to be the case
that words and music can
touch us very deeply
emotionally on a heart level.
Combined with music's ability
to structure brain waves,
the head and the heart can
come into coherence, producing
a vast expansion
of the biofield,
and at times expanding
the consciousness
into mystical states.
>> When you work with sound,
you get into a place of deep
breathing and deep gratitude
and appreciation in order
to achieve
heart-brain coherence.
And then if you tone the
sound, like an "ah," which
is a great sound for the heart
center, the "ahh," or a hum,
"hmm," it is possible to create
an interface between yourself,
other people, but
also what I call
the "Gaia matrix," the
electromagnetic field
of our planet.
[DRAMATIC MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Every day, we learn more
about the full potential
of this heart-brain synergy.
>> Now with the discovery of
neurons in the human heart
and the understanding the heart
and the brain, two organs,
function as one system.
They work together.
It's giving us new ways to
think about our relationship
to the world around us,
about our relationship
to sound and vibration and
matter, because as we achieve
the higher brain and heart
states, what we are doing
is we're resonating with
elements, dimensions
of reality, beyond what
we have known in the past.
>> Various brain states can
be achieved by stimulating
the entire brain using a
technique called "brain
entrainment."
>> I can expose you to a sound
that's pulsing at a brainwave
speed.
[DRUMMING]
And your brainwaves will
try to time themselves
to this drumbeat
because it's the most
dominant one in my environment.
And that's called
brainwave entrainment.
>> Ancient spiritual leaders
likely used brain entrainment
to guide individuals
into expanded states
of consciousness.
[DRUMMING AND SINGING]
>> In ancient shamanic cultures,
they used to have the drumming
or the didgeridoo.
The shaman would create a
certain rhythm with the drum,
like a heartbeat
rhythm, for example.
>> You'll see that the speed of
that drumbeat is about 5 hertz.
It's sort of like--
[CLAPPING HANDS]
[VOCALIZING]
That is about 5
hertz, right there.
And that means that I'm tapping
the drum at a brainwave speed
called theta.
Theta is where
your brain waves go
when you're dreaming in sleep.
And that means that if I
start pounding this drum,
your brain waves, which
are awake in beta function,
will slow down and cross
over the borderline
into alpha at about 13 Hertz--
12, 11, 10, 9, and finally get
down to this 5 hertz and theta
and lock onto it.
>> And this would then take
them into an altered state.
And they would go on a
shamanic journey, for example.
>> And if I speed the drum beat
up, my brain waves will follow.
If I slow it down, my
brainwaves will follow.
And we can see all this on EEG.
>> Long-term practitioners
of meditation,
such as Tibetan monks,
exhibit an even higher level
of consciousness,
now known as gamma.
Gamma waves can link all parts
of the brain simultaneously.
>> When I was in school, I was
taught that there were four
brain states.
But it was the meditators
in the Tibetan monasteries
that began to show Western
scientists that we're only
beginning to
understand the brain--
that there is much more than
those four brain states.
Now we know there is
a brain state that
is called gamma, between 30
and 100 cycles per second.
When the Tibetan meditators
showed the scientists
that they said, OK, we'll
rewrite the textbooks.
The Tibetans said,
well, if we do
a different kind of
meditation, we can exceed this.
And then they learned about a
brain state called hyper gamma.
So what we're
beginning to understand
is that we are only
our potential and our capacity.
>> I was involved in
some testing of brainwave
biofeedback equipment which
shows on a computer screen
the various levels of the
brain waves in real time.
This allows one to learn
to modify the brain waves
in response to the feedback.
I wasn't able to produce any
of the gamma frequencies, which
are above 40 hertz,
except while I
was playing the didgeridoo,
where the gamma feedback went
to the very top level.
So perhaps playing
this ancient instrument
helps to entrain the brain
waves to simulate expanded
states of consciousness.
[PIANO MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Scientists have recently
discovered that brain
entrainment can bridge the
right and left hemispheres
in remarkable ways.
>> The next step, which
was this stupendous,
knock the world on its
ear sort of discovery,
was what happens when
we put headphones on?
What if you weren't
pounding an actual drum?
What if we did
something with something
called binaural beats, where you
have two sounds, 100 hertz, 105
hertz?
And that's now revealed a
pure quirk of neurophysiology
functioning-- that this
hemisphere listens to this ear,
and this one
listens to this ear.
And the ear is going,
excuse me over here,
are you hearing
what I'm hearing?
>> Across the corpus callosum,
the right brain and the left
brain are trying to
talk to each other.
And they're trying
to find agreement
with each other of
what are we hearing
from the environment around us.
>> In all of our
biological evolution,
there's never a time where it's
possible for one ear to hear
something where the other
one doesn't hear it,
because sound
disperses everywhere.
It's an active brainwave
entrainment process
as opposed to a passive
through speakers.
>> And it doesn't just
synchronize left or right.
It synchronizes left-right,
front to back, top down.
>> Only with the headphones on,
where the ears can't hear what
the other ear is doing, do
you get the synchronizing
of the hemispheres.
It's where all of this amazing
stuff happens in the brain.
On EEG, when we analyze
people, at the moment
you solve a problem, bang,
hemispheres synchronize
and fall back apart.
At the moment I have a new,
original, out-of-the-box idea,
bang, and these come apart.
A spiritual revelation--
bang, comes apart.
[MYSTERIOUS MUSIC PLAYING]
>> What are the benefits
of this synchronized zone?
The possibilities might
literally and figuratively
be mind-boggling.
>> Now for the first time
in our biological evolution,
we have a situation where
we're floating the brain
for prolonged periods of time
in this synchronicity zone.
Now you can use that
as a tool to find out
what frequencies to use, precise
to a couple of decimal points,
will bring it back to 0 so
that the master system that
tells all systems what to do
is now in a state of balance.
>> Using these techniques,
we can potentially assist
the brain in aligning or
balancing our organs, glands,
meridians, chakras, and more.
Or we can tune our bodies by
using simpler sonic remedies.
[CHIMING SOUND]
>> We know, for example, that
strumming a guitar or stringed
instruments can bring a
peaceful and calming effect
to our cardiovascular system.
[DIDGERIDOO AND FLUTE PLAYING]
>> Wind instruments also bring
a sense of peace and calm.
[ORGAN PLAYING]
Organs can actually organize
the cerebrospinal fluid
in our spinal column and
awaken our consciousness.
[VIOLIN PLAYING]
Violins tend to engender
a feeling of compassion.
>> Listening to or playing music
is one of the few things that
can light up the whole brain,
as seen on EEG scanners.
Music connects the
corpus callosum,
which bridges the right and
left hemispheres of the brain
and stimulates the use of the
whole brain simultaneously.
It can help the brain to
go into coherence, which
stimulates higher functioning.
[HARP PLAYING]
>> A physical instrument can be
very useful, but not crucial,
to healing.
>> Mantras have been used for
thousands of years in many
different traditions.
[DRUMMING AND SINGING]
>> "Mantra," a Sanskrit
term, means "mind tool."
And it is intended to help
train the mind to focus.
Since the mind generates
frequencies and thoughts
constantly, the intention
of the use of mantras
can help to entrain the
frequency of the mind's
thoughts to cosmic wisdom.
>> Whether it's
Amen, ohm, shalom,
these are sounds from different
traditions that are very
similar.
There are neurological
benefits from the use
of chanting a word, either
aloud or even silently.
[CHIMING SOUNDS]
>> Ancient techniques for
healing are also available.
>> You can go to a sound healer.
And you have some that work with
shamanic tools like the drums,
the didgeridoo, or you have
the crystal singing bowls,
Tibetan bowls.
There are all kinds of
different sound instruments
that can be used.
[BOWLS CHIMING AND WOMAN
VOCALIZING]
>> With the crystal bowls,
it feels like it's opening up
into this almost angelic-like
realm of frequency that people
feel very open to.
They feel almost like there's
this divine feminine or angelic
energy that is singing to them.
And there's something
about that that really
calms the nervous system.
>> Every person has a
particular net, grid,
matrix of energy in their subtle
bodies that have particular
energetic nodal points
that we think of as chakras
and acupuncture points, and then
energetic connections between
them.
Probably best known today would
be the acupuncture meridians,
but there are many others as
well known to ancient cultures.
And so one of the great secrets
of the ancient traditions
is to know what types
of vibrational qualities
to apply to the energy field
or to specific energy centers
to be able to ripen them like
a plant growing from a seed.
>> The word "chakra" originates
from the Sanskrit language.
And it means "wheel."
They're essentially vortexes
of spinning energy interacting
with various physiological,
neurological,
and emotional systems
within the body.
Each chakra has its own
vibrational frequency
which is depicted through a
certain color, musical tone,
geometry, and planet.
>> Your body is vibration.
It's incredibly
receptive to sound.
And it's receiving
sound and wants
to come in resonance with it.
Sound vibration is moving
through your tissues,
through the water of your body.
And these frequencies
have the ability
to move in and act
actually as a technology
to bring you back into
resonance, to bring
your body back into harmony.
And the visceral feeling once
you leave a sound healing
by using these different
notes is that you
feel your nervous system relax.
You feel that your
heart may be more open.
[CHIMING]
>> When I work with
people therapeutically,
I work with the simplest
intervals possible,
meaning C and G. It's the
first interval that happens
in the harmonic series
besides an octave.
In Chinese culture, in
the ancient cultures,
in ayurvedic cultures
and so on, C and G
was considered the interval
of the perfect balance
of yin and yang.
It was considered the
interval of the perfect dance
of Shiva and Shakti.
This is C. This is G.
There's two ways to play.
We could tap them.
[CHIMING]
You can hear the
overtones ringing.
And you can move your body like
this, like Tai Chi, or Qigong.
And you move with the sound.
It's a form of
active meditation.
Or we could tap them on your
knees or even your elbows,
and they'll ring like this.
And that's when we
hold them in our ears
for a quiet, still meditation.
[HUMMING]
And hum.
And we do this kind of
meditation once in the morning,
once at night.
And it's consistent.
It will begin to ingrain the
ability to return to coherence.
[TUNING FORK RINGING]
[ENERGETIC MUSIC PLAYING]
>> This concept can be extended
to harmonize large groups
as well.
>> If you have 1,000 tuning
forks in an auditorium,
and there's 50% of
them that are C sharp,
and you ring a C
sharp tuning fork,
all the other C
sharp in the room,
because they have the
right distance of the fork,
will start oscillating.
And that is called
sympathetic resonance.
[CHIMING SOUND]
So things can oscillate or
resonate in sympathetic modes.
Understanding these
principles of resonance
and sympathetic resonance can
allow us to actually understand
how to build very advanced
technology instruments that
are resonating in energetic
field of space and time.
And now you have access to
incredible amount of energy,
incredible amount of forces--
the gravitational force, the
electromagnetic force, and so
on.
>> This advanced scientific
theory has deep connections
to the past.
>> The ancient Egyptians
seem to have been onto this.
The belief is that the pyramid
was a giant speaker that
bathed the entire Egyptian
civilization in a resonant tone
that brought peace,
that brought harmony,
that brought prosperity.
We could literally set up a
means whereby masses of people
could be listening to
the same pieces of music
and be activating aspects
of our consciousness,
healing our body, and
literally bathing our culture
in frequencies that engender
prosperity, peace, love, joy.
>> And each of us can
start with ourselves.
>> We can also become
the tuning fork.
When we can learn to
control our own rhythms
and be a strong resonator, we
can put the right frequencies
out into the field around us.
And that can then entrain
others into our field.
>> What inventions and
discoveries might arise from
this new era of sound science?
To begin, we can reduce
or even eradicate disease.
>> We know now that all
matter resonates at a specific
frequency.
And if you look, for
example, at a cancer tumor,
obviously the
atoms in that tumor
are resonating at a frequency.
If you can isolate the frequency
of the atoms in the tumor,
and you can use a sound device
to create a resonant frequency
that actually
cancels it out, all
of a sudden you can
destroy that tumor, leaving
all the healthy tissue
around it untouched.
>> I had a dream that one
day I would hopefully be able
to learn how to work with DNA
using sound and light to be
able to play DNA like
keys on a piano keyboard.
[PLAYING PIANO]
That we could turn
off certain markers
that would be
potentially harmful to us
or putting us at greater risk
of greater and more significant
illnesses, and also
that we could really
play to our own strengths.
I always saw DNA, with its
adenine, thymine, cytosine,
and guanine combinations
and nucleotide pairs,
as actually being musical
relationships right
from the very beginning.
We haven't figured
it out fully yet.
But there's a lot of
anecdotal evidence
and emerging new
scientific evidence
that would suggest that we are
not very far away from being
able to deliver on that dream.
[ENERGETIC MUSIC PLAYING]
>> And collectively,
we can align in spirit.
>> Never in the past,
in all of our history,
have we had the tools with brain
entrainment and binaural beats
through headphones to link
tens of thousands and millions
of people together.
It's never been possible before.
That gives us an edge on
tipping the quantum field.
>> As we achieve the higher
brain and heart states,
what we are doing is we're
resonating with elements,
dimensions, of reality, beyond
what we have known in the past,
but very, very real.
And these are the
foundations of what
our most ancient and
cherished spiritual traditions
have always led us to embrace.
The science is only
now catching up
with the practices
of our ancestors.
>> Everything needs to
move towards sound healing.
It's going to be healthier.
It's going to be safer.
And it's going to
have better results.
>> We believe that now, all the
research that we're conducting
is leading us ever closer to a
future of sound healing rather
than pharmacologic healing and
a new paradigm for medicine
itself.
>> There are harmonic overtones
produced by the movement
of celestial bodies.
Next, on "Sound of Creation,"
we explore the mysterious music
of the spheres.
[MYSTERIOUS MUSIC PLAYING]